Backend integration into the lead workspace — 4 October 2026

IMPORT
The teammate archive srinath-backend-v1.zip supplied 30 files, 372627
uncompressed bytes. The archived HANDOVER.txt exactly matched the supplied
srinath-backend-HANDOVER_1.txt. Only rarebridge/api/, rarebridge/services/,
tests/api/ and requirements-backend.txt were imported. Preflight rejected path
traversal, symlinks, encrypted members, duplicate names, disallowed ownership,
existing destinations and oversized members. No shared data or AI file was
overwritten. The original HANDOVER.txt is preserved as the author's record.

DEPENDENCIES
The root installed requirements-backend.txt into .venv using Python 3.14.
Pinned: fastapi 0.142.2, starlette 1.7.0, pydantic 2.13.5, uvicorn 0.54.0,
jsonschema 4.26.0; test dependencies pytest 9.1.1 and httpx 0.28.1.
No new dependencies were added by these integration fixes.

ACTUAL INTEGRATION FIXES
1. ai_bridge.py used to collapse every lead AIServiceError into a generic 502
   and include unexpected exception text. It now retains the lead's public-safe
   code/message/details/status, including quota 429, unavailable 503 and timeout
   504. Unexpected import, capability and generation exception contents are not
   reflected in API responses or health notes.
2. The bridge used to discard all explanation fields except the four baseline
   fields. It now preserves validated draft_message, check explanations,
   provenance and the exact assessment fingerprint. The collaboration brief can
   retain the validated message rather than silently switch to its template.
3. The bridge rejects mismatched current-assessment fingerprints and citations
   to withdrawn publications, including DOI/PMID aliases.
4. assessments.py copies recorded proposed_use, target_subgroup,
   documented_differences and assumptions into before/after when present in a
   bundle. It does not invent these fields from similarity or asset metadata and
   does not change deterministic checks/outcomes. The copied scope participates
   in explanation/brief current-state hashing.
5. Known extraction source aliases resolve to the registry's canonical ID before
   the lead function is called. The response retains requested_source_id. This
   prevents a correct canonical source response from failing the bridge's source
   identity check. Extraction still returns a pending preview with
   import_status=not_imported; the reviewed graph is unchanged.

VALIDATION
The original 36 backend tests passed before integration patches. All 46 backend
tests then passed, including 10 new boundary tests using synthetic injected AI
services only. Test fixtures are test-only, never saved as genuine runtime model
responses. These tests read no .env, make no provider requests and change no real
curation files. The only test warning is Starlette's httpx TestClient deprecation;
the pinned suite passes and the production server is unaffected by this warning.
Command: .venv/bin/python -m pytest tests/api -q

CURRENT SIGNED OVERLAY, READ THROUGH THE REGISTRY
The latest registry check loaded 58 review-log rows. Exactly 20 rows were
source_checked and all 20 retained Srinath's human sign-off. Newly added entries
remain pending unless a person reviews them. No sign-off was added by backend
integration. All four assessment outcomes were needs_information:
  framework-for-syngap1
  framework-for-scn2a
  framework-for-stxbp1
  citizen-dataset-for-syngap1
The documented SYNGAP1-to-STXBP1 route was source_checked. The original handover's
unsigned-overlay outcomes describe the older package state, not current data.
Source checked is a narrow factual review, not permission to implement a study.

RUN
.venv/bin/python -m uvicorn rarebridge.api.app:app --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8000
Restart after overlay changes. All source IDs are opaque; use URL encoding and
the existing path source resolver for DOI identifiers containing '/'.

REMAINING BOUNDARY
This validates backend routes, signed-data loading and the injected AI boundary.
This note records the original backend import. The frontend is now integrated;
current suites include 53 API tests and verified local graph/product/AI journeys.
Genuine Claude verification is recorded in submission/AI_VERIFICATION.txt;
no live AI calls were made during these original backend tests. Runtime extraction
does not approve evidence or merge it into curated claims. Final app tests must
use the returned pending/source-checked and live/cached labels faithfully.
