RareBridge — standalone technical demo recording script

This is a separate submission from the patient walkthrough and the team video.
Suggested length: four minutes, plus an optional extension if the portal permits.
Submit the public app and source links with it wherever the field allows.

SETUP AND EXACT TABS
- Open https://rarebridge-global-ai.vercel.app in Chrome. Use the stable public
  URL throughout. Do not record a localhost URL or a login-protected deployment.
- Record a browser window, not your whole desktop. Hide bookmarks and unrelated
  tabs. Use Do Not Disturb. Keep the address bar visible for the opening shot.
- On a Mac, Command-Shift-5 -> Record Selected Portion -> Options -> select your
  microphone. Record your voice. A webcam is optional unless the portal says so.
- Aim for 1920x1080 if available. Browser zoom 100%, or 110% if the actual labels
  are too small. Test the finished file: the evidence tally must be readable.
- Choose Patient / simple in the header. Show all sources before starting. Keep
  the motion setting on for the opening; use Pause motion if movement distracts
  you while explaining. Close account/settings/brief dialogs.
- Do one rehearsal before recording. Wait for the real API to finish loading.
  If AI takes time, make a clean cut or keep the loading state. If you prepare
  an answer earlier, say "This is an AI answer generated for this exact view"
  and retain its displayed live/saved label. Never fake typing or response speed.
- Keep .env, terminal environment output, credentials, private lab chats and
  personal patient records outside the recorded window. Any screen-shared editor
  must have .env closed. Use only the fictional patient-group scenario below.

USEFUL TABS — OPEN BEFORE THE TECHNICAL RECORDING
A. Home: https://rarebridge-global-ai.vercel.app
B. SYNGAP1 framework, evidence already open:
   https://rarebridge-global-ai.vercel.app/#/disease/MONDO%3A0012960?goal=natural_history&evidence=framework-for-syngap1
C. SCN2A framework, evidence already open:
   https://rarebridge-global-ai.vercel.app/#/disease/MONDO%3A0013388?goal=natural_history&evidence=framework-for-scn2a
D. Governed SYNGAP1 dataset:
   https://rarebridge-global-ai.vercel.app/#/disease/MONDO%3A0012960?goal=natural_history&evidence=citizen-dataset-for-syngap1
E. Source/architecture: https://github.com/AtharvaAiren/rarebridge-global-ai
F. Real timing tool: https://rarebridge-global-ai.vercel.app/impact-pilot.html

TECHNICAL DEMO — EXACT SCREEN ACTIONS AND SPOKEN SCRIPT
Suggested length: 4 minutes. Speak at a normal pace; make cuts between segments
if necessary. Each quoted block below is the complete spoken text for that shot.
You can keep a webcam inset, but ensure it never covers the inspector or labels.
The separate team video has its own script; this demo proves how the system works.

0:00–0:25 | THE PROBLEM AND THE UNIT OF ASSESSMENT
SHOW: SYNGAP1 framework tab B with the disease, goal, resource and open tally.
SAY:
  "We built RareBridge for patient organizations that want to build on existing
  research. Finding a related disease is not enough: a study method or dataset
  may have different participant, access and staffing requirements. Our unit
  is a disease, a goal and one specific resource. We turn the evidence and
  unresolved conditions into a collaboration proposal."

0:25–0:50 | THE REAL GRAPH AND ITS REVIEW STATES
SHOW: map and Legend; select a connection or a route using Trace on the map in
the Overview inspector, or the bottom Connection button. The actual inspector
shows relationship origin and source review separately.
SAY:
  "The map uses source-linked records. This shared framework between STXBP1 and
  SYNGAP1 is already published; we use it to validate the workflow. A reviewed
  navigation inference is still an inference. Other relationships remain
  pending. We preserve those distinctions instead of turning every path into
  a proven biological connection."
DO: allow the route trace to settle. Show its actual pending/source-checked badge.
Do not describe a longer pending route as reviewed because a direct route was.

0:50–1:20 | THE SIGNATURE SOURCE-DEPENDENCE TEST
SHOW: Evidence, its 2 supported/3 open tally, Hide, then the two changed rows.
SAY:
  "The assessment separates documented use from questions such as access and
  local fit. Hiding this publication changes two supported checks to unknown.
  Three checks were already open. The overall outcome can stay 'Questions still
  open'. This is a test of source dependence, not a paper retraction or biological
  experiment. Restoring the source restores support without moving the graph."
DO: Show again. Wait until the restored tally is visible before the next shot.

1:20–1:55 | THE TRAINED AI AND A SOURCE-BOUND PATIENT ANSWER
SHOW: Evidence inspector -> expand "Plain-language explanation (AI)" ->
"Ask a question". Fill "What should we ask a researcher next?" -> click
"Ask the research assistant". Show the genuine answer, model/live-or-saved label,
citations if returned, and "Questions for a research partner".
SAY:
  "Existing Claude Sonnet 4.6 provides the trained AI layer. Ask a question in
  patient mode and it explains this exact resource and its current checks.
  The server binds selected check IDs to eligible active sources and recorded
  follow-up questions. Changing the evidence or reading mode invalidates the
  old answer. These controls protect the recorded state; generated medical
  meaning still requires human review."
If the call is slow, cut the waiting interval and disclose that you cut a wait.
Do not claim every answer has citations: a record-based unknown may have none.

1:55–2:25 | LESS-OBVIOUS LEADS WITHOUT AUTOMATIC APPROVAL
SHOW: scroll below the map to "What else could we investigate?" -> Find research
leads. Show one known-route interpretation and a proposed hypothesis IF the
returned result includes both. Do not narrate a category that was not returned.
SAY:
  "The research scout can propose leads by interpreting recorded relationships,
  rather than only following a fixed ranking. Each returned lead carries its
  sources, basis and unanswered questions. Known-route interpretation and new
  proposals are labeled separately. Every generated lead stays pending review.
  We propose what to investigate; we do not claim an approved shared treatment."
Fallback if only known routes are returned: say "This run returned a known-route
interpretation; the system can also propose hypotheses when the records justify
them." Show the actual run. Restore sources before using the scout: it reads
the full registry and is disabled while a source is hidden.

2:25–2:50 | AN HONEST UNKNOWN AND A CONCRETE NEXT ACTION
SHOW: switch to SCN2A tab C. Point at unanswered applicability in this source
pack. Return to restored SYNGAP1 tab B -> Prepare collaboration brief -> public
contact routes/open questions -> Download as text.
SAY:
  "For SCN2A, this framework's applicability is unanswered in our current
  records. Unknown does not mean it cannot work, or that no research exists.
  Back in our SYNGAP1 case, the brief packages the sources, open checks, a public
  contact route and an editable draft. A human decides what to ask and whether
  to send it. Export always uses the current evidence view."

2:50–3:20 | THE TECHNICAL ARCHITECTURE
SHOW: public GitHub README, scroll to Architecture. Optional: DevTools Network
in a separate clean shot, with Fetch/XHR selected, for a real evaluate request.
Show its assessment_id and withdrawn_source_ids plus changed_checks response;
do not show environment variables, account credentials or private files.
SAY:
  "React and TypeScript render the SVG and D3 graph. A FastAPI backend serves
  the graph, search, assessments and AI on the same Vercel origin. A pinned
  public DisMech snapshot plus a curation overlay provides the registry.
  Deterministic checks control outcomes; Claude handles interpretation and
  candidates. DOI and PMID aliases count as one paper, while preprint versions
  remain separate. The core workflow still works without an AI response."
Optional exact requests for a readable Network close-up:
  POST /api/assessments/evaluate
  {"assessment_id":"framework-for-syngap1","withdrawn_source_ids":["DOI:10.1002/epi.70374"]}
  POST /api/ai/ask
  {"assessment_id":"framework-for-syngap1","withdrawn_source_ids":[],
   "question":"What should we ask a researcher next?","mode":"patient"}
Use requests the app actually makes; this is explanatory copy, not fake traffic.

3:20–3:45 | VERIFICATION AND THE 10X QUESTION
SHOW: GitHub submission/public-release-verification/final/summary.json and/or
switch to the real timing tool tab F. The timer begins empty, which is honest.
SAY:
  "The recorded release passed 335 software checks and eleven public workflow
  checks. The updated white interface has its own browser verification. We do
  not have a measured tenfold improvement. Our pilot compares manual and app
  preparation on the same task and sources, with quality review. The intended
  milestone is an expert-reviewed feasibility decision, so expert response time
  must count too. Faster drafting alone does not prove faster research."
The 335/11 results are the earlier recorded core-release checks; do not say the
CSS update retrained a model or reran every backend test. The new theme browser
report is submission/white-theme-verification/report.json once checked.

3:45–4:00 | TECHNICAL RESULT AND CLOSING
SHOW: the actual exported brief and the public app/source URLs.
SAY:
  "This is the technical result: a source-inspectable assessment and an exported
  brief that preserves the current checks, evidence gaps and next questions.
  Judges can use the public app and reproduce the dataset and application from
  the repository. Expert validation and impact measurement are the next steps."

OPTIONAL 30-SECOND EXTENSION — DATA ACCESS AND PAPER INGESTION
Show these only if the portal gives you extra time. Otherwise mention them in
Q&A rather than rushing the essential workflow.

A. Governed dataset — tab D, about 15 seconds:
  SHOW: exact dataset asset, access checks and public contact route.
  SAY: "This dataset example adds a different reuse constraint: governed access.
  The app exposes the access route and need for a qualified research partner;
  it does not distribute restricted patient data or grant permission."

B. Paper ingestion — tab B, about 15 seconds plus an honest wait cut:
  SHOW: evidence -> Plain-language explanation (AI) -> Add a paper. Fill Source
  title, Public source URL and Abstract or excerpt using a real short public
  passage. Click Preview candidate claims. Show source_excerpt and 'review
  pending' on the real result. A previously verified demonstration uses:
    Source title: SFARI Base
    Public source URL: https://www.sfari.org/resource/sfari-base/
    Abstract or excerpt: Create a SFARI Base project, which includes the title,
    abstract, and an IRB approval or exemption document.
  This literal public-source excerpt is preserved in the public repository file
  submission/public-release-verification/extraction-sfari-public.json.
  Verify it against the official page before recording. Do not substitute the
  model's generated rationale for source text. This is an ingestion example,
  not evidence about the separate Citizen SYNGAP1 dataset.
  SAY: "A public excerpt becomes source-linked candidate claims. They remain
  pending and do not automatically enter the reviewed graph."
  If the exact source sample is unavailable, choose a passage you can open and
  verify yourself; this optional shot should not delay the main recording.

PRESENTATION NOTES
- Say SYNGAP1 approximately "sin-gap one", STXBP1 "S-T-X-B-P one", SCN2A
  "S-C-N two A". Say natural-history study as "tracking how the condition changes
  over time". You do not need to teach molecular biology in the walkthrough.
- Narrate what changes on screen. Slow down at the two-check change and the
  next questions. Keep the cursor still when you want viewers to read.
- Keep the existing live/saved model labels, source status and inference badges
  visible. Text overlays should name the action, not invent a measurement.
- Do not spend demo time on settings/account/login/booking previews. They are
  explicitly previews, and their presence is not the core contribution.
- The strongest closing is the actual collaboration brief, not a full-screen
  graph with no next action. Show the public contact route and concrete questions.
- Do not claim: a newly trained graph foundation model, all claims reviewed,
  approved SCN2A reuse, granted dataset access, a new STXBP1/SYNGAP1 discovery,
  measured 10x speed, guaranteed medical truth, or a booked doctor appointment.
- Answer "What is new?" with: "The resource-specific, source-inspectable journey
  from connection to open checks and a sourced collaboration proposal." Do not
  claim exclusive worldwide novelty.
- Answer "Why deterministic checks?" with: "Recorded evidence and access
  conditions should be repeatable. The trained model interprets and proposes;
  the check engine keeps the current recorded state inspectable."
- Export MP4, play it once end to end, check microphone/readability and the exact
  60-second walkthrough duration. Confirm the portal's technical/team-video
  length and file limits, upload the new files and save the submission receipt.

Name your new recording RareBridge-technical-demo.mp4. Upload it to the technical-demo
field, the patient walkthrough to its own field and the team video to its own field.
