RareBridge animated graph: creative and technical handoff for Srinath's Claude

YOUR ROLE AND AUTHORITY
Act as a senior interaction designer, motion designer and frontend engineer.
The teammate has selected a coding assistant with strong motion capabilities;
use that capability to implement a distinctive, polished graph experience.
Own the visual composition, animation system and implementation choices.
Inspect the existing frontend first, choose a coherent direction and build it.
Do not stop at a proposal, a static mockup or a default graph-library example.
Make routine design decisions autonomously within the existing frontend scope.
This brief concerns the coding assistant, not RareBridge's runtime AI provider:
do not change the app's configured Claude model, credentials or AI API contract.

WHAT IS FIXED / WHAT YOU CAN INVENT
Fixed: actual API data/IDs, relationship meaning/direction, review states,
source aliases/versions, current-assessment export, accessible controls and
public deployment compatibility. The evidence/data sections below are precise.
Creative freedom: canvas composition, node shapes, palette, typography, lighting,
depth, camera choreography, easing, layout forces, reveal transitions and panel
composition. Screen proportions, palette, file names and timings below are
starting suggestions. Improve them when your design serves the journey better.
Treat semantic correctness and visual ambition as simultaneous deliverables.

OBJECTIVE
Upgrade the existing frontend's graph into an animated, understandable atlas.
Keep the current search, assessment and export journey working. The public
submission must use a hosted API; do not hard-code localhost in production.
Read this brief alongside handoffs/contracts/API_CONTRACT.txt and the current
backend implementation. Old handoff owner names are historical: Srinath is now
handling the frontend, Saanvi the evidence, Dhruv evaluation.

THE EXPERIENCE
When Maria searches SYNGAP1, the selected disease appears and its actual
connections spread into place. A focused view shows related diseases, studies,
the selected resource, a paper and public collaborators. The user can expand
the biology, inspect a relationship, hide a source, see the resulting evidence
gaps and prepare a collaboration brief. Node movement follows these actions.

The memorable moment is evidence sensitivity: hide the anchor paper and the
affected links dim while the assessment's changed checks become visible.
Reset restores the displayed support. This is an inspection of source
dependencies, not a simulated biological experiment or a retracted publication.

CREATIVE TARGET
Make the graph feel like a carefully designed scientific instrument that a
family can use: spatial, tactile, alive and immediately understandable.
Use motion to reveal structure, direct attention and explain changes. Give the
scene depth through layering, focused light, occlusion-aware labels and camera
movement. Aim for a compelling first five seconds and an equally clear minute
of actual use. The essential visual hierarchy is the patient's disease, a
specific research resource, the evidence behind it and the next collaborator.
Treat the evidence-hide interaction as the signature scene of the product.

Compose three connected moments:
1. Discovery: a selected disease becomes the anchor; real neighbors emerge and
   settle into a readable constellation. Clearly labeled entity groups appear.
2. Understanding: selection focuses a connection, the route becomes legible,
   and the inspector explains its sources and unanswered checks.
3. Action: inspecting the resource leads naturally to an editable sourced brief.
   Preserve the visual context while the user moves from map to next action.

Keep the existing product identity where it works. You may redesign the graph
page and its inspector/toolbar together for a coherent result. Preserve existing
search, assessment and export functionality; avoid introducing a second app.

1. SCREEN STRUCTURE
Desktop:
  Top: existing navigation, global search and natural-history study goal.
  Graph toolbar: Focused / Explore, Fit view, Pause motion, Reset view, Legend.
  Main: suggested canvas share 65-70%; inspector 330-380px at right. You may
        improve this composition with an overlay inspector or staged panels.
  Bottom: compact persistent journey controls: Connection / Resource / Evidence
          / Collaboration brief. These are UI stages, not fabricated graph nodes.
  Footer: real coverage, visible node count and pending/source-checked legend.

Initial inspector: disease summary, the selected resource and open questions.
Node selection: label, type, recorded review state, description if available,
relevant sources and an action appropriate to that node.
Edge selection: plain explanation, relationship, claim origin, review state,
confidence label, source title/URL, source version and provenance.
Resource selection: open the real assessment; button to prepare the brief.
Contact selection: explain recorded role and open the public URL. Never label a
paper author as confirmed resource owner unless the record actually says that.
Mobile: graph above a collapsible inspector or bottom sheet; keep the same data
and provide a list of nodes/relationships for keyboard and screen-reader use.

2. GRAPH ORGANIZATION
Two modes share one data source and one selection state.

FOCUSED (default): target roughly 12-18 real nodes as available. Include selected
disease, selected asset, assessment sources, a relevant recorded route and its
study nodes, related disease and recorded collaborators/organizations. Preserve
actual edge endpoints and IDs. A route requiring more nodes takes precedence
over the target count. Do not silently drop intermediate claim nodes and draw
an unsupported direct edge. A source-checked-only filter may yield a smaller or
disconnected graph; show that honestly.

EXPLORE: start with the backend's 40-node response. Let the user reveal biology,
phenotypes and additional assets. Fetch max_nodes=80 for an optional expansion
and display the returned coverage. The server's current limit is 150; the demo
does not need to render every available node. Hidden nodes are not absent data.

Suggested placement is a visual aid, not clustering evidence. You may choose
a radial, spatial or other readable arrangement instead:
  Selected disease: central/left anchor, fixed while browsing.
  Genes, mechanism claims, cell types/processes and phenotypes: left/lower area.
  Related diseases and study nodes: middle area.
  Selected research resource: prominent right-center anchor.
  Publications: upper area near the relationships they support.
  Organizations, researchers and study teams: right/lower area near their studies.
For a force-based layout, use soft position forces plus repulsion/collision;
permit dragging. Do not claim
that geometric distance means biological similarity or asset compatibility.

CURRENT REAL RECORDS TO EXPECT
  SYNGAP1 disease: MONDO:0012960
  STXBP1 disease: MONDO:0012812
  SCN2A disease: MONDO:0013388
  Shared resource: DOI:10.1002/epi.70374#framework
  Anchor publication: DOI:10.1002/epi.70374
  Studies: study:prommis and study:starr
  Organizations: org:cure-syngap1 and org:stxbp1-foundation
  Researcher example: researcher:ingo-helbig
  Team example: team:chop-endd-nhs
These are identifiers for integration checks, not a replacement for API data.

IMPORTANT ROUTE DISTINCTION
The direct SYNGAP1/STXBP1 shares_published_study_framework_with navigation edge
is source_checked AND claim_origin=inferred. The longer route through ProMMiS,
framework and STARR contains pending edges. Do not promote the longer route
because the direct edge was reviewed. A published shared framework does not
establish shared treatment response or SCN2A applicability.

3. VISUAL LANGUAGE
Starting direction: dark navy canvas (#09111F), subtle spatial background and
readable pale labels. You may propose a stronger coherent visual direction and
implement it without waiting for aesthetic approval. Maintain text contrast.
Use restrained depth/lighting throughout and stronger emphasis for the selected
node and route. Every visual effect should preserve labels, shapes and status.
Suggested entity palette; alternatives are welcome with a clear type legend:
  Disease: blue circle, selected radius about 18-24 graph units.
  Gene: violet small circle or capsule.
  Mechanism/claim/process/cell type: coral small diamond; label actual type.
  Phenotype: warm gold small circle.
  Asset/study: turquoise rounded square/hexagon; selected asset is prominent.
  Publication/source: pale document-shaped mark.
  Organization/researcher/study team: rose mark plus type label.
Never interpret these colors as safety, approval, disease severity or confidence.
Node size reflects UI importance/type, not patient count or scientific certainty.

Encode relationship origin separately from source review:
  Recorded/imported + source_checked: solid muted pale line.
  Recorded/imported + pending: short dashed line with pending indicator.
  Inferred: dotted line regardless of source review, with an explicit Inferred
            label in the inspector; a checked inferred edge keeps its checked
            badge without becoming a proven biological relationship.
  Selected link: thicker bright line, retain its dash pattern and status.
  Source hidden for current inspection: subdued opacity with a visible label.
Actual conflicting/refuted assessment checks use their actual status badges;
do not invent contradictory research to obtain red graph edges.
You may improve these visual encodings, provided origin and review remain
separately inspectable, text labels remain available and checked inferred
navigation never appears as proven biology.

Label selected disease, selected resource and selected route nodes at all zoom
levels. Show other labels on hover/selection or sufficiently close zoom. Use
plain shortened display labels with full original label in the inspector.
Separate parallel links with small curves; preserve each edge ID/check ID.

4. MOTION CHOREOGRAPHY (STARTING STORYBOARD; DESIGN AND TUNE IT)
Build a coordinated motion system: consistent easing, short spring responses,
intentional pauses and interruptible transitions. Prefer fewer well-composed
sequences over many unrelated effects. You own the final timing and technique.
A. Search: fade selected disease in, then reveal adjacent nodes in 60-100ms
   stagger groups. Run the settling simulation for roughly 1-2 seconds.
B. Hover: highlight the node and adjacent edges; dim unrelated marks modestly.
   Avoid re-running layout on hover.
C. Click: pan/zoom to selection over 450-650ms and open the inspector. Freeze
   selected node position while its evidence is being read.
D. Drag: linked nodes react naturally; optionally retain the dragged position.
E. Reveal a neighborhood: insert new nodes near their actual neighbor, then
   reheat the simulation briefly. Existing nodes should move as little as possible.
F. Trace selected route: sequentially highlight its nodes/edges. A small light
   particle on a selected link is optional; retain source-to-target direction
   and explain that this is connection tracing, not biological material flow.
G. Hide source: fade only affected support markings over 250-400ms; keep node
   positions unchanged. Show the changed checks from the API alongside them.
H. Reset: restore current-view support markings and the original assessment;
   do not scramble the layout.
I. A gentle pulse around a selected node is optional. Keep node coordinates
   stable after settling so labels and click targets remain usable.

ENHANCED MOTION OPPORTUNITIES
- A node birth sequence with outward spread and a subtle elastic settle.
- Depth through soft shadow, selective glow and restrained perspective; consider
  pointer parallax on background layers while keeping hit targets aligned.
- A path-reveal sequence that opens the explanation as the final node settles.
- Semantic zoom: close views reveal relationship labels and source details;
  wide views emphasize communities/resources with readable context.
- A coordinated source-hide sequence: paper treatment changes, referencing
  links dim, changed checks receive an emphasis animation, questions become
  salient. Animate only real returned changes, preserving unrelated context.
- A resource-to-brief transition that retains the selected resource identity
  and makes the next step feel connected to the map.
Choose the subset you can complete and verify before handover. Extra effects
must remain interruptible, respect reduced-motion and keep the public build
responsive. Decorative particles are not additional graph nodes or evidence.

For a 3D implementation, give users a deliberate default camera and a reliable
Fit/Reset action. Pause automatic camera movement during inspection and after
manual input. Keep node/edge labels legible, selected items visible and desktop
and phone selection usable. True 3D is a design option, not a required feature.

Pause motion means stop physics and decorative animation while keeping pan,
zoom, selection and evidence controls operational. Respect reduced-motion:
initial deterministic positions, no particles/pulsing/staggered reveal, instant
camera movement. For react-force-graph, do not use pauseAnimation() for a
user-facing pause if it also disables interaction; freeze physics using fixed
coordinates/engine controls.

5. DATA AND STATE: USE THE EXISTING BACKEND
GET /api/search?q=...&limit=10
GET /api/diseases/{encodeURIComponent(id)}/overview?goal=natural_history
GET /api/graph?disease_id=...&assessment_id=...&max_nodes=40
POST /api/assessments/evaluate
  {assessment_id:'framework-for-syngap1',withdrawn_source_ids:[]}
POST /api/ai/explain (optional)
  {assessment_id:'framework-for-syngap1',withdrawn_source_ids:[]}

Graph envelope: nodes, edges, sources, coverage, data_origin, schema_version.
Adapt edges to the renderer's links property. Copy API records into mutable
renderer objects; force libraries can replace source/target IDs with node
objects and attach coordinates. Never feed mutated renderer objects back to
assessment state, export or API calls. Keep a helper endpointId(x) accepting
either a string or an object with id. Preserve sourceId/targetId separately.

Graph UI state should include selectedNodeId, selectedEdgeId, selectedDiseaseId,
assessmentId, canonical withdrawnSourceIds, viewMode, visibleNodeIds,
highlightedEdgeIds, positionsById, motionEnabled and reducedMotion.
Keep the untouched graph response and current assessment response separately.
Memoize renderer data; do not rebuild all node objects on each hover/animation
frame. Ignore stale async responses after rapid disease/assessment switching.

ROUTE HIGHLIGHTING
Use overview.related_diseases[].recorded_routes[].edge_ids and node_path.
Check every highlighted edge/node is present in the graph response. Fetch a
larger view if a route is incomplete; otherwise show that it is incomplete.
The node_path is navigation order and may traverse an edge backwards. Preserve
the edge's actual relationship direction; don't reverse a scientific assertion.
The graph's candidate_shared_annotations edges are already marked inferred and
pending. Use the returned explanation. Score is only a ranking aid: no percent
confidence label and no conversion into thickness suggesting clinical certainty.

SOURCE WITHDRAWAL
The graph endpoint does not accept withdrawal state and is not recomputed by
assessment evaluation. Implement a current-view overlay, not a rewritten graph.
Canonicalize aliases from response.sources: PMID:42446932 and
DOI:10.1002/epi.70374 identify one paper. A preprint version_of relationship is
NOT an alias and must not be collapsed into that same source identity.
Evaluate with the selected canonical withdrawnSourceIds. Use after.checks and
changed_checks as authoritative for check support; use remaining_support when
returned. Dim the hidden paper and mark referencing graph edges as affected,
but do not declare an entire multi-source edge unsupported just because one
source was hidden. For general graph relationships there is no recomputed
source-support verdict: label the view change, retaining original review status.
For evidence_for_check edges, check_id binds the affected check. With the anchor
paper hidden, two checks lose support and the overall outcome can remain
needs_information. Display that actual result. An assessment_scope link remains
the selected scope even when its supporting checks change; it is not permission.
Reset sends an empty withdrawal list. Source-checked history is not erased.
Existing export must always use the current after assessment and withheld-source
list. Any AI explanation/draft must be refreshed or clearly invalidated after
withdrawal; never display an older explanation as the current assessment.

6. IMPLEMENTATION STRUCTURE AND ENGINE CHOICE
Inspect the existing graph, state, package.json and export implementation before
choosing an engine. Reuse the current API client and assessment state.
Suggested structure; adapt it to existing conventions rather than treating the
file list as a mandatory framework:
  components/graph/AtlasGraph.tsx        canvas/interaction orchestration
  components/graph/GraphToolbar.tsx     view/fit/motion/legend controls
  components/graph/GraphInspector.tsx   node/edge evidence and actions
  components/graph/GraphLegend.tsx      type/origin/review meanings
  components/graph/GraphList.tsx        accessible equivalent selection
  components/graph/graphStyles.ts       visual mappings, label/edge renderers
  components/graph/graphAdapter.ts      copied API -> renderer records
  components/graph/useGraphLayout.ts    position cache and layout transitions
  components/graph/useGraphSelection.ts actual route/neighborhood selections
  Existing assessment store            single current withdrawal/export state

You may choose the renderer that best achieves the design in the time available:
- Existing graph engine: retain and customize it if it meets interaction needs.
- Canvas/2D with depth styling: react-force-graph-2d plus d3-force is a practical
  starting point for custom node drawing, stable physics and focused camera moves.
- WebGL/3D: an option if it materially improves the experience and you can finish
  picking, labels, source states, mobile behavior and production integration.
- A custom SVG/Canvas renderer is acceptable if it provides the required graph
  interactions and can be verified without delaying the handover.
Choose once after inspection and avoid an engine rewrite late in delivery.
Use an animation helper already present in the frontend when suitable. Add a
new dependency only for a concrete need; keep the existing package manager,
pin the tested resolution and return its lockfile.

If using react-force-graph-2d, hooks to consider: nodeCanvasObject, nodePointerAreaPaint,
linkLineDash, linkCurvature, linkDirectionalParticles, onNodeClick/onLinkClick,
d3Force, d3ReheatSimulation, centerAt, zoom, zoomToFit, cooldownTime.
Use ResizeObserver for canvas/container sizing. Verify custom draw and pointer
hit areas match; custom edges need sufficiently generous click precision.
Settle simulation separately from renderer redraw. Disable persistent redraw
when there are no active animations; if a custom pulse is running after physics
stops, the canvas needs redraw (autoPauseRedraw configuration). Clean up timers,
observers and animation frames. Avoid React setState on every animation frame.
Tooltips should render plain escaped text, never untrusted source HTML.

PERFORMANCE AND FINISH
Design for the actual 40-node response and optional 80-node expansion. Aim for
smooth interaction on a normal laptop, ideally near 60fps; measure if tooling
is available rather than claiming a frame rate you did not observe. On phones,
lower decoration complexity before sacrificing inspection or readable labels.
Limit persistent blur/bloom, particles and full-scene redraws. Keep selection
responsive during transitions. Preserve positions across inspector changes and
withdrawal. Rehearse search -> route -> source hide -> reset -> export quickly
and deliberately to catch races, stuck animation and stale text.

7. BUILD ORDER AND HANDOVER
Begin with a brief implementation decision: chosen visual direction, renderer
and the state you will reuse. Then build immediately; aesthetic approval is
not a prerequisite. Prioritize one complete signature sequence early.
First: real API graph + basic draw + node/edge inspector + working assessment
and export. Second: stable positions, focus/explore and selected-route zoom.
Third: evidence-hide/reset overlay and corresponding changed checks. Fourth:
node reveal, settling motion and optional route trace. Fit/reduced-motion/list
accessibility must keep essential interactions available throughout.
Return the existing frontend/ with source, package.json, lockfile, build/run
commands and concise HANDOVER.txt. Do not edit backend or signed curation data.
Production API configuration uses same-origin /api or a public HTTPS API base;
VITE_API_BASE_URL is public configuration and contains no provider credentials.

Include a short interaction recording if capture tooling is available, otherwise
screenshots of the opening graph, selected route and hidden-source state. State
which behavior you actually verified, the build command/result, remaining issues
and any measured performance. Leave no broken controls or silent fixture fallback
in the delivery. List omitted enhancements explicitly so integration is clear.

ACCEPTANCE
- Real graph records and review/origin distinctions survive selection and zoom.
- A node can be dragged and then read without endless coordinate jitter.
- Edge click opens its actual sources/explanation, including pending/inferred.
- The direct reviewed route is not confused with its longer pending route.
- SCN2A shows candidate/unknown applicability, not approved reuse.
- Hiding the canonical publication shows the two actual check changes; reset
  restores them. Multi-source links and source-version distinctions remain honest.
- Export and any AI explanation match the current assessment, not stale state.
- Pause/reduced-motion keeps controls and keyboard/list inspection usable.
- Production build succeeds; public deployment has no localhost API calls.
- The first reveal, selection and source-hide sequence look intentional and
  coordinated; selected labels remain readable during/after animation.
- Rapid selection or source changes cannot leave stale inspector, AI prose or
  export state. Essential controls work while motion is disabled.

PRIMARY IMPLEMENTATION REFERENCES
https://github.com/vasturiano/react-force-graph
https://d3js.org/d3-force/position
https://d3js.org/d3-force/collide
